hey what's wrong with that plane
it's flying over your head moving in
circles has it lost its way
are there some problems with its
navigation systems nah
calm down it's just sprinkling salt over
the clouds
it's called cloud seeding now i know for
sure
rock salt is used to prevent people from
slipping and cars from skidding off the
road in winter
but why would we need to do it in the
sky
well drought is a big problem in many
places all over the planet
a lack of drinking water parts soil
wilting plants
and cloud sitting could solve this
problem once and for all
to put it simply the whole process is
sewing clouds with chemicals to make it
snow or rain
different stuff is used in this process
for example
bright yellow silver iodide dry eyes
and even common table salt they mix with
the clouds and
thicken them the larger the clouds are
the more likely it'll rain or snow it
goes like this
water evaporates and rises into the
atmosphere in its gas
form there it cools down and forms into
clouds
the bigger and heavier water droplets
become the sooner they fall down to
earth
cloud seeding helps to speed up these
droplets growth
planes either shoot the chemicals into
the clouds or release them while flying
nearby
sometimes the seeding is even done from
the ground
scientists claim that when the
atmosphere is clean the chances it'll
rain after some cloud seeding
increased by 30 to 35 percent if the
atmosphere is dirty though
this number is lower just 10 to 15
and still some people are skeptical
about the cloud seeding idea
they're sure this method works only on
the clouds that would rain anyway
but if cloud seeding does work lots of
regions with little water or regular
droughts will be literally saved
even the driest places have some water
in the air
once you manage to pull it from there
voila you can create rain falls
there's another thing cloud sitting can
help with and that's hail
in some areas a single hail storm can
cause up to 500 million
dollars in damage that's why specially
modified planes
fearlessly enter storms and spray
chemicals into the clouds
this reduces hailstone size plus if
they're in time
the planes prevent small cloud towers
from growing into huge mature
hail storms ever noticed white trails
airplanes leave in their wake
those are called contrails they appear
when humid emissions from jet engines
mix with the atmosphere
it's much colder and has lower pressure
than the exhaust gases
the water vapor they contain condenses
and freezes
this forms a cloud like the one your
breath makes on a cold day
contrails can have different thicknesses
they can stay in the sky for
hours or disappear after several minutes
they can stretch for miles
or they can be rather short everything
depends on the altitude
and the humidity and temperature up
there look at a contrail attentively
and you might be able to predict the
weather if the contrails thin
and short live the air at high altitudes
is dry
it's not going to rain and the weather
is going to be just fine
but if you see a thick contrail that
stays in the air for a long time
bring along your umbrella the air is
humid high above your head
it's an early sign of an upcoming storm
the average passenger aircraft reaches
its cruising altitude of six to seven
miles in the first 10 minutes of flight
but how high a plane flies
still depends on its weight and some
other characteristics
for example the famous supersonic
passenger airliner concord
its greatest speed was twice faster than
the speed of sound
and it used to fly way higher than other
modern day planes
at fifty thousand to sixty thousand feet
but this plane
was the exception rather than the rule
by flying at such a height
planes can avoid bad weather high winds
and heavy rains
often occur in the lower layers of the
atmosphere
also keeping to high altitudes allows
planes to stay clear of heavy air
traffic
for example helicopters and light
aircraft birds and even big insects
don't bother you during the flight too
and if an emergency happens at a height
of more than six miles
pilots will have more time to figure out
the best possible solution
why can't commercial airliners fly
higher than 38 000 feet
well it's not that they can't they
simply don't
because if they did there would be
serious safety issues
first of all if a plane is flying that
high it needs more time to get back to a
safe altitude
and during an emergency like rapid
decompression
every second counts at lower altitudes
airliners can also rely on the wind if
they rise too high
they'll waste too much fuel to stay in
the air
while traveling at such a great height
planes can't communicate with the ground
surfaces
as well as they do when flying lower
once a plane climbs
too high the air can't provide enough
lift to keep the machine going
the lift is created by the difference in
air pressure but at high altitudes this
difference
is too small air may not look like
something real
because it's nothing like metal or
plastic and still
it's one of the things that keeps planes
aloft
let's say a plane is heading for space
it has large
cleverly designed wings and super
powerful engines
but the higher it goes the thinner the
air becomes
until there's hardly any air left and
then nothing can help the plane go
further since there is a near vacuum
around that's why
we still need rockets to get to space
and finally
planes don't fly too high because
they're a bit too heavy
the more a machine weighs the more
difficult it is to bring it to a certain
altitude
planes don't take off when the weather
is too hot for one thing
jet engines don't like extreme
temperatures a much bigger problem with
scorching temperatures
is that aircraft just can't generate
enough lift to rise into the air
and as you already know if there's no
lift there's no flight
to generate this lift the air around the
plane should be dense enough
but the hotter the air is the less dense
it becomes
when the temperature rises air molecules
heat up and start to move faster
they're also moving apart creating more
in between space
this results in low air density the
wings don't have enough stuff to push
against
and they're unable to produce the
necessary lift
the highest temperature at which a plane
can take off or land depends on the
aircraft
runway length payload and airport
altitude
in most cases it's 110 to 125 degrees
fahrenheit
airplanes can fly through hurricanes and
those are less
dangerous to flights than thunderstorms
but why
the most catastrophic hurricanes can
travel thousands of miles
and their effects can linger for days
afterwards
most hurricanes form at a much lower
altitude than thunderstorms
that's why a plane can easily fly over
certain parts of a hurricane
of course no commercial airliner will
ever go through the eyewall of a
hurricane
there the winds are the most powerful
but while flying
farther away from the center of a
hurricane planes are in no danger
as for a thunderstorm it can create
gigantic cloud structures
their tops can reach more than sixty
thousand feet that's almost twice higher
than the average cruising altitude of
commercial airplanes
so when an airplane comes across a
thunderstorm pilots either try to find a
roundabout route
or simply turn back if possible
planes avoid flying over very high
mountains like everest
imagine that a plane starts to lose
cabin pressure while moving over the
himalayas
maybe one of the doors was sealed
incorrectly or
there's a crack in a window or the
fuselage the passengers and crew members
put on their oxygen masks
but this oxygen is going to run out in
15 to 20 minutes
at an altitude of 35 000 feet it's a
disaster
that's why pilots have to make the plane
drop down to 10
000 feet there the passengers will be
able to breathe without using oxygen
masks
but the plane is still moving over the
himalayas where many peaks are taller
than 25
000 feet in other words the plane has
nowhere to go
another reason why planes have such an
impressive cruising altitude
it allows pilots to have some room for
error
if something goes wrong with the engines
the captain can glide the aircraft while
trying to fix the problem
unfortunately even the most experienced
pilot can't do much
if there's a mere six thousand feet down
to the mountain slope
let's say something happens to a plane
and an emergency landing is
unavoidable then pilots might have
problems with finding an airport in the
mountains
if we talk about the himalayas kathmandu
airport can deal with a jet
but this place has only one runway and
doesn't have an instrumental landing
system plus
if you've ever flown over the mountains
you must know that the turbulence up
there is quite nasty
winds move over high mountain ranges at
breakneck speeds
and create so-called mountain waves and
while turbulence isn't dangerous per se
airlines still tried to plan their
routes around mountainous areas